the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
courseware at
ocw.mit.edu okay so remember last
time on Tuesday we learned about the
chain hole
and so for example we saw that if we
have a
function that
depends sorry on three variables XY Z
but XYZ themselves depends depend on
some variable
T then you can find a formula for DW DT
by writing down w subx DX
DT plus W suby Dy
DT plus W subz DZ DT and the meaning of
that
formula is that well the change in W is
caused by changes in X Y and Z x y and z
change at rates dxdt dydt dzdt and this
causes the function to change
accordingly using the in terms of the
partial well the partial derivatives
tell you how sensitive W is to changes
in each
variable okay so we're going to just
revite this in a new
notation so I'm going to revite this in
a more concise form
as gradient of w product with the
velocity Vector
drdt
where so the gradient of w is a vector
formed by putting together all of the
partial
derivatives okay so it's the vector
whose components are the partials and of
course it's a vector that depends on X Y
and Z right these guys depend on XYZ so
it's actually one vector for each point
XYZ you can talk about the
gradient
of w at some
point
XYZ so at each point it gives you a
vector that actually is what we will
call later a vector
field but we'll get we'll get back to
that
later and
drdt is just the velocity vector
dxdt dydt
DT okay
so the new definition for
today is the definition of the gradient
vector and our goal will be to
understand a bit better what does this
Vector mean what does it measure and
what can we do with
it but you see that in terms of
information content it's really the same
information that's already in the
partial derivative
are in the
differential
so yes and I should say of course you
can also use the gradient in other
things like approximation formulas and
so on it's just so far it's just
notation it's a way to rewrite things
but so here's the first pool property of
the
gradient so
so I claim that the gradient Vector is
perpendicular to the level
surface corresponding
to setting the function W equal to a
constant okay
so if I draw a contour
plot of my function so I'm going to
actually forget about Z because I want
to draw a two variable contol plot so
say I have a function of two variables X
and Y then maybe it has some Contour
plot and I'm saying if I take the
gradient of the function at this point
XY so I will have a vector well if I
draw that Vector on top of a contour
plot it's going to end up being
perpendicular to the level curve at this
point same thing if I have a function of
three variables then I can try to draw
its Contour plot of course I can't
really do it because the Contour plot
would be you know living in space with X
Y and Z but it would be a bunch of level
surfaces and the gradient Vector would
be a vector in space that Vector is
perpendicular to the level
surfaces so let's try to see that on a
couple of
examples so let's do a first example
let's do
things you know what's the easiest case
let's take a linear function of X Y and
Z so I will take W equals A1 * X Plus A2
* y plus A3 *
Z
well so what's the gradient of this
function well the first component will
be A1 that's partial W partial
X then A2 that's partial W partial Y and
A3 partial W partial Z okay
now what are the level
surfaces well if I set W equal to some
constant C that means I look at the
points where a1x + A2 y plus f p z
equals c what kind of surface is that
it's a plane
and we know how to find a normal Vector
to this plane just by looking at the
coefficients so it's a plane with normal
Vector exactly this
gradient and in fact you know in a way
this is the only case you need to check
because of linear approximation if you
replace a function by its linear
approximation that means you will
replace the level surfaces by their
tangent planes and then you will
actually end up in this situation but
maybe that's not very convincing so
let's do another
example
so let's do a second
example let's say we look at the
function x² + y^2 okay so now it's a
function of just two variables because
that way I will be able to actually draw
a picture for
you okay so what are the level sets of
this function well they're going to be
circles
right wal C is a
circle X2 + Y2 =
C so you should say maybe sorry say the
level
curve is a circle
so the Contour plot looks something like
that now what's the gradient
Vector well the gradient of this
function so partial W partial X
is
2X and Par W par Y is 2 y so let's say I
take a point x comma y
and I try to draw my gradiant Vector so
here at
XY so I have to draw the vector 2x 2 Y
what does it look
like well it's going in that direction
it's parallel to the
position Vector for this point and it's
actually twice the position Vector so I
guess it goes more or less like
this what's interesting to us is it is
perpendicular to this
circle okay so it's a general feature
let me show
you more
examples oops not the one I
want so I don't know if you can see it
so well well hopefully you can so here I
have a contour plot of a function and I
have a blue Vector that's the gradient
Vector at the pink point on the plot so
can see I can move the pink point and
the gradient Vector of course changes
because the gradient depends on X and Y
but what doesn't change is that it's
always perpendicular to the level
curves anywhere where I
am my gradient stays
perpendicular to the level
curve okay is that convincing is that
visible even for people who can see
blue okay
so okay so we have a lot of evidence but
you know let's try to prove the theorem
because it will
be
interesting
so oh first of all sorry any questions
about the statement the examples
yes
ah very good question does the gradient
Vector why is the gradient Vector
perpendicular in One Direction rather
than the other so we'll see the answer
to that in a few minutes but let me just
tell you
immediately uh to decide which side it's
pointing to it's always pointing towards
higher values of a function okay and
we'll see that maybe in about half an
hour
so well let me say actually
points
towards higher
values of
w okay any other
questions I don't see any questions so
okay so let's try to prove this theorem
at least this part of the theorem we are
not going to prove that just yet that
will come in a
while
so
well maybe we want to understand first
what happens if we move inside the level
curve okay so let's imagine that we're
taking a moving point that stays on the
level curve or on the level
surface and then we know well what
happens is that the function stays
constant but we can also know how
quickly the function changes using the
chain rule up there so maybe the chain
rule will actually be the key to
understanding how the gradient vector
and a motion on the level surface
relate so let's take a
curve rals R of
T that
stays
inside well maybe I should say on the
level
surface W equals
c okay
so let's think about what that means so
just to get you used to this idea I'm
going to draw a level surface of a
function of three variables okay so it's
some surface given by the equation W of
XYZ equals some constant
C and so now I'm going to have a point
on that and it's going to move on that
surface so I will have you know some
parametric
curve that lives on this
surface so the question
is what's going to
happen at any given time well the first
observation is that the velocity Vector
what can I say about the velocity
Vector of this motion it's going to be
tangent to the level surface right if I
move on a Surface then at any point my
velocity is tangent to the curve but if
it's tangent to the curve then it's also
tangent to the
surface because the curve is inside the
surface so okay it's getting a bit
cluttered maybe I should draw a bigger
picture let me do that right away here
so I have my level surface wal C I have
a curve on
[Music]
that
and at some
point I'm going to have a certain
velocity so the claim is
that the
velocity
V equals
drdt is
tangent to the level W equals
c because it's tangent to the curve and
the curve is inside the level okay now
what else can we say
well we have the chain rule to tell us
how the Val of w
changes so by the chain
rule we have DW
DT so the rate of change of the value of
w as I move along this curve is given by
the dot product between the
gradient and the velocity
vector
and so well maybe I can rewrite it as NE
W sorry uh d
w
v um and that should be well what should
it be what happens to the value of w as
T
changes well it stays constant because
we are moving on a curve that curve
might be complicated but it stays always
on the level W equals
c so it's zero
because W of T equals c which is a
constant okay is that
convincing y okay so now if we have a
DOT product that's zero that tells us
that these two guys are
perpendicular
so
so the gradient Vector is perpendicular
to
V okay that's a good start we know that
the gradient is perpendicular to this
Vector tangent that's tangent to the
level surface what about other vectors
tangent to the level
surface well in fact I could use any
curve drawn on the level wal C
so I could move really any way I wanted
on that
surface in
particular I claim that I could have
chosen my velocity Vector to be any
Vector tangent to the
surface okay so let's write this so this
is true
for
any
curve well say for any
motion on
the level surface W equal C so that
means V can
be any
Vector
tangent to the
surface tangent
to the level um see for example let me
draw one more
picture
okay so I have my level surface so I'm
drawing more and more levels and the
Never quite look the same but and I have
a point and at this point I have the
tangent plane to the level surface okay
so this
is tangent
plane to the
level then if I choose any VOR in that
tangent plane let's say I choose and no
but when that goes in that
direction then I can actually find a
curve that goes in that direction and
stays on the level so here that would be
a curve that somehow goes from the right
to the left and of course it has to end
up going up or something like
that okay so
given any
Vector
tangent let's call that vector v tangent
to the
level we get that the gradient is
perpendicular to V so the gradient is
perpendicular to this Vector tangent to
this curve but also to you know any
Vector I can draw that's tangent to my
Surface so what does that mean well that
means the gradient is actually
perpendicular to the tangent plane or to
the surface at this
point so the
gradient is
perpendicular
and well here I've Illustrated things
with a threedimensional example but
really it works the same if you have
only two variables when you have a level
curve it has a tangent line and the
gradient is perpendicular to that
line okay any
questions
no okay
so let's see that's actually pretty neat
because there's a nice application of
this which is to try to figure out now
we know actually how to find the tangent
plane to anything pretty
[Music]
much
okay
so let's
see so let's say that for example I want
to
find
the tensent
plane
to the
surface with
equation let's say X2 + y^ 2us z^2 =
4 at the point 21 1 let me write
[Music]
that
so how do we do that well one way that
we already
know if we solve this for Z so we can
write z equals function of X and Y then
we know tangent plane
approximation for the graph of a
function Z equals some function of X and
Y but that doesn't look like it's the
best way to do it okay the best way to
do it now that we have the gradient
Vector is actually to directly say oh we
we know the normal Vector to this plane
the normal Vector will just be the
gradient oh I think I have a cool
picture to show
so okay so that's what it looks
like okay so here you have the surface
x² + y sare - zare = 4 that's called a
hyperboloid because it looks like what
you get when you spin a hyperbola around
an axis and here's its tangent plane at
the given point so it doesn't look very
tangent because it crosses the surface
but it's really I mean if you think
about it you'll see that's really the
plane that's approximating the
surface in the best way that you can at
this given point it is really the
tangent
plane
so how do we find this
plane well you can plot it on a computer
but that's not exactly
you know how you would look for it in
the first place so the way to do it is
that we compute the gradient so the
gradient of what well the gradient of
this
function okay
so so it should say this is the level
set W = 4
where W is x² + y^ 2us z^
2 and so we know that the gradient of
this well what is
it 2x then 2 Y and then -2
Z so at this given
point I guess we're at xal 2 so that's
four and then y and z are 1 so 2
-2 okay and that's going to be the
normal
Vector to the surface or to the tangent
plane and that's one way to define the
tangent plane right it has the same
normal Vector as the surface or that's
one way to define the normal Vector to
the surface if you prefer being
perpendicular to the surface means that
you're perpendicular to its tangent
plane
okay so the
equation is well
4x + 2
y - 2 Z equals
something where something is well we
should just plug in that point we'll get
8 + 2us 2 looks like we'll get
eight and of course we could simplify by
dividing everything by two two but it's
not very important
here okay so now if you have a surface
given by an evil equation and a point on
the surface well you know how to find
the tangent plane to the surface at that
point okay any
questions
no okay let me give just
another reason why you know another way
that we could have seen this
so I claim in fact we could have done
this without the gradient when using the
gradient in somehow a disguised way so
here's another
way so the other way to do it would be
to start with a
differential okay DW well it's pretty
much the same content but let me write
it as a differential DW is 2x DX minus 2
y sorry plus 2 y d y minus 2 Z DZ so at
the given
point at 211 this is 4 DX +
2dy minus 2
DZ now if we want to change this into an
approximation formula we can we know
that the change in w
is approximately equal to 4 Delta X plus
2 Delta
Yus 2 Delta
Z
okay so when do we stay on the level
surface well we stay on the level
surface when w doesn't change so when
this becomes
zero okay now what does this
approximation sign mean well it means
that for small changes in XYZ this guy
will be close to that guy it also means
something else remember these
approximation formulas they are linear
approximation they mean that we replace
the function actually by some closest
linear formula that will be nearby and
so in
particular if we set face equal to zero
instead of you know approximately zero
it means we'll actually be moving on the
tangent plane to the level set if you
want setting equality is in
approximations means that we replace the
function by its tangent
approximation
so
[Applause]
okay
so the level corresponds
to Delta W equal 0 and its tensent
plane corresponds
to
4 Delta x + 2 Delta Yus 2 Delta Z equal
Z that's what I'm trying to say
basically and what's Delta X well that
means it's the change in X so what's the
change in X here that means well we
started with xal 2 and we moved to some
other value X so that's actually xus
2 right that's how much X has changed
compared to two and 2 * y - 1 - 2 * Z -1
= 0 that's the equation of the tangent
plane it's the same equation as the one
over there these are just two different
methods to get it okay so this one
explains to you what's going on in terms
of approximation formulas this one goes
you know right away to the end by using
the gradient
Vector so in a way with this one you
have you don't have to think nearly as
much but you can use either
one okay
questions no okay so let's move on with
let's move on to a new
topic which is another application of a
gradient
vector
and that is directional
derivatives okay so let's say that we
have a function of two
variables X and
Y well we
know how to compute partial W partial X
or partial W partial Y which which
measure how W changes if I move in the
direction of the x-axis or in the
direction of the y
axis so what about moving in other
directions well of course we've seen
approximation formulas and so on but you
know we can still ask is there a
derivative in every direction and that's
basically yes that's the directional
derivative okay so these are derivatives
in the
direction of I hat or J hat the vectors
that go along the x or the y-
axis
so what if we
move in another Direction let's say in
the
direction of some unit
vector
let's call it
U okay so if I give you a unit Vector
you can ask yourself if I move in that
direction how quickly will my function
change
so so let's look at the straight
trajectory what what this should mean is
I start at some value
XY and there I have my Vector U and I'm
going to move in a straight line in the
direction of U and I have the graph of
my
function and I'm asking myself how
quickly does the value change when I
move on the
graph you know in that direction
okay so let's look at a straight line
trajectory so we have a position Vector
r that will depend on some parameter
which I will call S um you'll see why
very soon in such a way that the
derivative is this given unit Vector you
had so why do I use S for my parameter
rather than T well it's a convention I'm
M I'm moving at I'm moving at unit speed
along this line so that means that
actually I'm parameterizing things by
the distance that I've traveled along
the curve sorry along this line so here
it's called s in the sense of you know
Arc Length or actually it's not really
an arc because it's straight line so
it's the
distance
along the
line okay so because we parameterizing
by distance we're just using S as a
convention just to distinguish it
with distinguish this from other
situations and so now the question will
be what
is dwds
what's the rate of change of w when I
move like
that well of course we know the answer
because that's a special case of a chain
rle so that's how we will actually
compute
it but in terms of what it means it
really means we are asking ourselves we
start at a point and we change the
variables in a certain direction which
is not necessarily the x or the Y
Direction but really any Direction and
then what's the derivative in that
direction okay does that make sense as a
concept kind of I see some faces that
are not completely convinced so maybe I
should show more pictures well let me
first write down a bit more
and I'll show you
something
so I just want to give you the actual
definition so sorry so first of all in
case you wonder what this is all
about so let's say that the components
of our unit Vector are two numbers A and
B okay then it means that we'll move
along the line X of s equals some
initial value the point where we're
actually looking at the directional
derivative plus s *
a we say plus a *
s and Y of s equal y0 + B * s and then
we plug that into
w
and then we take the
derivative so we have a notation for
that which is going to be
dwds with a
subscript in the direction of U to
indicate you know in which direction
we're actually going to
move and that's called that's the
directional
derivative in the direction of
U okay so let's see what it means
geometrically
oops
um so
so
remember we've seen things about partial
derivatives and we've seen that the
partial derivatives are the slopes of
slices of the graph by vertical planes
that are parallel to the x or the Y
directions okay so if I have a point you
know at any point I can slice the graph
of my function by two planes one that's
going along the X One along the y
direction and then I can look at
the slices of the graph let me see if I
can use that thing so we can look at the
slices of the graph they drawn here and
then we look at the tangent lines to
these slices and we look at their slope
and that gives us the partial
derivatives in case you're on that side
you want to see also the pointer was
here
okay so now similarly the directional
derivative means actually we'll be
slicing
we'll be slicing our graph by a vertical
plane it's not really colorful something
more
[Music]
colorful we'll be slicing things by a
plane that is now in the direction of
this Vector U and we'll be looking at
the slope of the slice of the graph so
what that looks like
here
so so that's the same applet by the way
that you've used on your problem set in
case you're
wondering so now I'm picking a
point on the Contour plot and at that
point I slice the graph so here I'm
starting by slicing in the direction of
the xaxis so in fact what I'm measuring
here by the slope of this slice is the
partial in the X Direction it's really
partial F partial X which is also the
directional derivative in the direction
of X of I sorry and now if I rotate the
slice then I have all of these planes so
you see at the bottom left I have the
direction in which I'm going there's
this like rotating line that tells you
in which direction I'm going to be
moving and for each Direction I have a
plane and when I slice by that plane I
will get so I have this direction here
going maybe to the Southwest so that
gives me a slice of My Graph by a
vertical plane and the slice has a
certain slope and the slope is going to
be the directional derivative in that
direction
okay I think that's as graphic as I can
get
okay any questions about
that
no okay so let's see how we compute that
guy
so let me just wrp again just in case
you want
to case you didn't hear me it's the
slope of the slice of the
graph by a vertical
plane
that contains the given Direction U
that's parallel to the direction
U so how do we compute it well we can
use the chain rule the chain
rule
implies that DW
DS is actually the gradient of w do
product
with
the velocity Vector drds but remember we
said that we are going to be moving at
unit speed in the direction of U so in
fact that's just gradient W do product
with the unit Vector
U okay so the formula that we remember
is
really d by DS in the direction of U is
gradient W product with
you and maybe I should also say in words
this is the
component of the gradient in the
direction of
U and maybe that makes more sense so for
example the directional derivative in
the direction of IH hat is the component
along the xaxis that's the same as
indeed the partial derivative in the X
Direction things make
sense dwds the direction of IH hat
is oh sorry what am I
doing radi w. I hat which is W subx
maybe I should find partial W partial X
okay
now so that's basically what we need to
know to compute these
guys so now let's go back to the
gradient and see what this tells us
about the
gradient
[Applause]
I see you guys are having
fun
okay okay let's do a little bit of
geometry
here that should calm you
down so
so we said dwds in the direction of U is
gradient w. U that's the same as the
length of gradient W Times the length of
U well that happens to be one because
we're taking a unit Vector times the
cosine of the
angle between the
gradient and the given unit vector
U so have this angle
feta okay that's another way of saying
we're taking the component of the
gradient in the direction of U but now
what does that tell us well let's try to
figure out in which directions W changes
the fastest in which direction it
increases the most or decreases the most
or doesn't actually
change so this is when is this going to
be the largest if I fix you if I fix a
point if I set a point then the gradient
Vector at that point is given to me but
question is in which direction does it
change the most quickly well what I can
change is the direction and this will be
the largest when the cosine is
one so this is larest when cosine of the
angle is one
that means the angle is
zero that means U is actually in the
direction of the
gradient okay so that's a new way to
think about the direction of the
gradient the gradient is the direction
in which the function increases the most
quickly at that
point
so the
direction of gradient W is the
direction of fastest
increase of w at the given point and
what is the
magnitude of w well it's actually the
directional derivative in that
direction
okay so if I go in that direction which
gives me the fastest increase then the
corresponding slope will be the length
of the
gradient
and what's the direction of fastest
decrease it's going in the opposite
direction right I mean if you're a
mountain and you know that you're facing
the mountain uh that's the direction of
fastest increase the direction of
fastest decrease is behind you straight
down okay
so uh the minimal value of
dwds is achieved when cosine of theta is
minus one that means Theta equal
180° that means U is in the
direction of minus the
gradient head points opposite to the
gradient
and
finally
when do we have
dwds equal
zero so in which direction does the
function not
change well we have two answers to that
one is to just use that formula so
that's when cosine Theta equal 0 that
means Theta equal
90° that means that U is perpendicular
to the
gradient the other way to think about it
a direction in which the value doesn't
change is a Direction that's tangent to
the level surface if we're not changing
it means we're moving along the
level and that's the same
thing
as being tangent to the level so let me
just show that on the picture
here so if I actually show you the
gradient uh you can't really see it here
I need to move a bit okay so the
gradient here is pointing straight up at
the point that I've chosen now if I
choose a slice that's
perpendicular you know in a Direction
that's perpendicular to the gradient so
that's actually tangent to the level
curve then you see that my slice is flat
I don't actually have any slope the
directional derivative in a Direction
that's perpendicular to the gradient is
basically
zero now if I rotate then the slope
slowly increases increases increases and
it becomes the largest when I'm going in
the direction of the gradient so here I
have actually a pretty big slope and now
if I keep rotating then the slope will
decrease again then it becomes zero when
I'm perpendicular and then it becomes
negative it's the most negative when I'm
point away from the gradient and then
become zero again when I'm back
perpendicular okay so for example if I
give you a contour plot and I ask you to
draw the direction of the gradient
Vector well at this point for example
you would look at the picture the
gradient Vector would be going
perpendicular to the level and it would
be going towards higher values of the
function and I don't know if you can see
the labels but the thing in the middle
is minimum so it would actually be
pointing in this kind of
Direction okay so that's it for
today